I really know people who drive from
one end of the city to the other, that's 40
minutes in the car to get to their
favorite club where they train and then
stop at the lane and walk 10
km. So what's not absurd? What
's not
absurd is
how it should practically
look like that inflammation, chronic inflammation of low
intensity
,
it's very unpleasant
.
protein I mean I'm
a medical biochemist Well I know it's
normal somewhere up to four here maybe 10
cr cr CRP and so on I think
we've all heard about it somehow but suddenly if it
lasts
too long in fact it all depends on the person or
it comes at the moment when the person
is most vulnerable then basically I mean it all
starts that's what Hippocrates said everything
starts in the intestines and in fact health
starts and is actually contained
within our digestive tract because we
are directly connected to the environment through
the food we eat and food is
actually the result of digestion which enables
the normal functioning of everything and our
metabolism, it is the result of the constituent
parts of our body, you can
change the appearance of your body a lot with physical activity and
diet , and how
this inflammation manifests itself is a big one,
I would say sluggishness develops in humans,
sluggishness is the only thing that is very
interesting and very interesting today, and I just
started talking about it with the academic
Vida de Marin, because she is also very
inclined to accept
all the latest knowledge, and as a neurologist
with many years of experience, she
actually explains some processes, I do not know
biochemistry very well of the brain and I have never dealt with
the biochemistry of the brain so deeply, but I have
friends and colleagues who are very close, in fact,
friends
who are top
neuroscientists today work in China and
they study the neurobiology
of the brain, they are Vedrana Montana and Vladimir
Barbura, they have excellent works, excellent
achievements in their
research, and I think they will show a lot more
in that field, especially regarding, for example,
the metabolism of cells in the brain and
the metabolism of cells that have long been
considered to be only building material
, that is the armature, that is, glia cells, and
today we know that they have very very
important functions I've
lost a little bit of you now honestly somehow we were talking about
chronic inflammation yes Now
I'm talking about neurobiology because
chronic inflammation is not only its source
at the level of the gut Aha aha Ok but
then we're talking about the so-called leaky
gut in the form of whatever English leaky
gut I don't want to use English
terms that's one of the rules there aren't
rules but et that but here's the
last thing mentioned and what I said
why I mentioned that it's very important
to know the brain
of course it's important because of that because
today it's known that there is a so-called
disruption at the level of the blood-brain
barrier, aha, then there is in fact
an increased permeability of the blood-brain
barrier for some products that otherwise
should not pass through the blood-brain
barrier, so it is called today the likage
Brain as a leaky brain because it is very
important that this organ of ours, which is the central
organ of the nervous system, especially
the hypothalamus, which regulates all hormones
Mhm, who are we, I will not say everything,
but a large number of factors that then
act through several stages to
release certain hormones.
mentioned that it is not good for
inflammation to appear at the level of, say,
the hypothalamus, and today it is
recognized and then, let's say, the whole
system of metabolic balance, and that means
whether the feeling of satiety and the government are
really in balance or not, all of this is
disturbed if such functions are not, they are not
as they should be, they are not balanced, they are not in
balance
in the sense that,
for example, you eat something and it is normal that
after 20
minutes
the hormone leptin should be released from the adipose
tissue that circulates in our circulation, it
should actually reach the receptors
in
the cells that are sensitive to them
and
put
a
signal
there.
the cell and then the cells actually want to
protect themselves and they don't want that signal I'm
hungry I'm hungry keeps going or I
'm full I'm full it keeps going with stop
it let this one mean I'm going to try
to play the devil's advocate represent
the audience Okay good Uh We kind of started
with the topic of low-
grade or low-intensity chronic inflammation
As you said, you started talking about
the intestines is it, so this one
we were talking about that crp that is it and then we
came to the brain can you just
make a link to all of this,
that low-grade chronic inflammation
is not only reserved for, say, organs
that are not organs of the nervous system, but
is also reserved for organs of the nervous
system. That is now known. Aha aha. Ok, that
means Crohn's. So at first it was
mainly associated with the intestines, so it was associated
with
metabolism
in general, which was
in some way
isolated .
of the nervous system, aha, and it just
happened at the level of the hypothalamus, these are now
the latest researches, I think it's
the College
Medical School, actually,
the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, the University
of America in this, Aha, if I
remember correctly, those papers were published, and then it's
good that some scientists immediately
said what can suppress such inflammations,
what can we do to make us better,
what can we do to simply
not have
a metabolic
imbalance means that we really use what we eat,
Aha, that means
metabolic n means that the body is not doing
its job efficiently. The efficiency
in turning something into the final products of
food decomposition means carbon dioxide,
water and energy to be used and not for
you
, let's say, the difference is, for example, if you eat
a
potato
cooked
in the skin and now it's
practically a whole food, is that
how
you
can
throw away the
skin
? Glucose is only
gradually released, yes, it is broken down
, but it is gradual if you have a sudden
large influx of glucose into the blood, and that is,
for example, another way of preparing potatoes, that
is mashed potatoes. Yes, where do you boil, process that
potato, you have to
mash it, you have to add a little fat
inside to make it tasty, most often
we add either some
recommended
oil or
butter, you have to
add more salt and you have to add milk,
it
means that it is not the same for the body, it is not the same .
mashed potatoes or carrot potatoes And
it's good to use, for example, boiled carrots,
raw carrots or boiled potatoes in their skins and
make them into a salad and for a few days it
can stay in the fridge and it's
actually an ideal meal with some salad, an ideal
meal because it gradually increases the level
of glucose in the blood, that is, it doesn't allow
a sudden increase in glucose. Then you have
a sudden burst of insulin
insulin as soon as diabetics, of course,
I think we all have too much, then
our pancreas wears out during our lives, we
live today, let's be realistic, we live
twice as long as people lived
at the beginning of the 20th century, so our
pancreas is constantly on that kind of
drink, some
sugary drink, carbonated, non-carbonated
, irrelevant, about it, you suddenly take
a large amount of sugar,
insulin is suddenly released, oh, it lasts, its
half-life lasts two or three minutes, and that
's it, it's a protein, it's a small peptide 51
amino acids are broken down quickly in the blood,
if I understand you correctly, in fact Uh through
that low-grade inflammation chronically chronic
inflammation of a low-grade low STUP Uh
our body loses the ability to efficiently
use Uh food the food
we consume and that's how it is and it
leads us to additional problems
of metabolic syndrome, let's say that
metabolic syndrome is quite
characteristic for a large part
of the population today,
I didn't know
, but the figure for the American
population is mentioned, it's probably the same
for the developed part of the West, let's say only 12%
of people in a metabolic straight
make it worse, that's terrible to hear, it means that
most
people consume processed food, that
's true, they think that they eat very, very
healthy food, that they eat food
that
is enriched,
was
, we think
that it's vitamins, that's
added
minerals
. with
low-grade chronic inflammation and the consumption of
processed food, the consumption
of processed food leads to the fact that
we eat 50%
more food because we don't chew
, we do
n't
waste
time chewing,
such food is mostly cooked. Gut Mhm, it cooks quickly
,
right
? put the last bite in
your mouth and we eat
that kind of food for at least 20 minutes or if not half an hour
shorter than if you would eat
a complete meal
Mhm actually
then there is a connection and in fact it is also important
what the source of food is and what kind of food
we prepare but also how we consume it and
whether we chew it or not chew it
or swallow it means that Shake in the morning and a smoothie
is not really the smartest thing, but
Shake in the morning and a smoothie I put in one 1000
calories which is not visible like this
the question is whether those
calories were used in such a way that
they could be what is said to be
metabolically active, whether that shake
puts you to sleep or that shake wakes you up, it depends on
what I put in it, if you suddenly
released insulin, it is possible that it was
insulin that was suddenly released from
the pancreas, can I describe to you what's in
the smoothie, you can, come on, let's see,
and you'll make it
.
oat pure oat flakes means
I put half a banana well cut
this one then I put, for example, almonds,
cashews, maybe I put some Greek
yogurt or the skiro or something like that
a little two pieces of chocolate or
something like that dark chocolate and mostly
some milk This one or almond
or something like that Oh milk that is not and
now it seems to me a lot of processed
foods in well basically it is
what happens in mine that is very let's say that
if you look at them individually they are all
excellent foods honey and honey Of course,
these are all excellent foods, that's it for us
nice, I do things like that occasionally,
it's convenient for us because we can,
say, through one such drink that
you prepare in two or three minutes and you drink
it within five minutes at the most, and
you drink coffee, you think, now I've got
everything.
You're fast, and you got a big
boost of glucose in
your body, and of course you also got that
fructose,
simple
sugars, honey, which is
excellent. if you
ate a banana maybe half an hour later, if
you made oats with that drink with that
milk, you added a little honey to them, but
if you cooked them in that milk and then
if you chewed them, they have to be eaten first
because you basically drink them and oatmeal
is full of starch, right? And
the starch starts
to break down in our mouths, that's why we have
teeth and that's why we have saliva, the enzyme found
in saliva is called alphaamylase or
ptyalin Which is the first for the breakdown
of carbohydrates and that for the breakdown of starch
, and I, I, I go over it, I ask that,
I said it last time, I ask my
students who, unfortunately, have such
an hourly
rate, but we are all forced to increase
it now
that we
are in those M, let's say, the conditions that are
like
this
after
the earthquake pandemic
. 10 and 100 runs to
the first bakery and buys some pastries, right,
and buys yogurt, that's all fine, but I,
you, I allow them to
eat during the lectures because I think it's not fair that
I force someone to listen to any
lecture or do anything
mentally or physically hungry according to that,
you judge him the way
it
is
in your head
. when you chew a pastry,
you can already
break down 60% of the carbohydrates in your mouth, and then it comes to
the stomach, that's what we said last time, it
doesn't break down there because the stomach lining is
too big for that enzyme to be active,
another enzyme that comes on the way to digestion
is in the small intestine, an enzyme that will be
secreted Uh, the outer part of the pancreas
, the pancreas should do more,
let's say let's say 40 to 60 maximum
percentage of the breakdown of
starch carbohydrates, and what does it seem to me
now It's like some kind of absurdity,
I think I had a lot of those topics in
the podcast, but what has the modern
way of life done to us that
today we literally have to learn how to breathe, how
to eat, some basic life
functions, exactly, as if we have problems
today, let's say we have big problems with
the development of Uh, teeth,
gums,
facial muscles, these are the muscles of our jaws,
I read that these are the muscles that have
the greatest
strength and they are very strong, but if children
haven't learned
to squeal, if people continuously eat,
let's say, such chopped meals
processed food, powders or such
things, even in adulthood So what
will we find ourselves with poorly
developed muscles, we will all have drooping
cheeks, we will have drooping, let's say, some
structures on the face that could be
otherwise developed and the cheekbones, all the jaws
are better developed, if you develop
your jaw, your teeth will find a place, how will they
all fit on your jaw, if you don't
develop it, then you have to artificially expand your
jaw We are in an absurd
situation that what used to
be taken for granted was
the usual eating meat around of bones, take
a bone in your hands and some of your teeth are used for
grinding
food We are the same, that's how we are We haven't
changed physiologically or morphologically
but the environment has changed and the availability
of food and the forms that are now on our table
have
changed, why then do
scientists who deal with the so-called
environmental factors
epigenetics keep saying it is very important to use everything
that nature has given you so that you can digest some
food because then you will
eat less, you will be fuller for longer and
you will
not burden your
internal
organs .
secretion
of hormones such as insulin such as
glucagon means insulin reduces glucose
in the blood, glucagon increases because it breaks down
glycogen reserves in the liver, so it releases
glucose when we need it, the role of
other hormones is not important, but
a whole range of pancreatic functions
is not mentioned, it is the basic organ that
secretes lipase, the enzyme that breaks down fats,
so it must be
preserved, it is the basic organ that secretes,
as I said, pancreatic amylase,
the enzyme that breaks down the final digestive products of
the breakdown of starch substances,
carbohydrates, but it is also an organ that
helps the final breakdown of proteins,
trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase are secreted there,
no , no, they are irreplaceable,
Uh, structures
, and then everyone is surprised,
what are we going to do now? The
bloating is happening to us,
we
do
n't
feel
well.
to us on
the plate in the way we should
eat, and perhaps a step before, we may
not have prepared the food in a way that
we could make the best use of it, have
an optimal intake in some reasonable
time, extend the feeding time,
say by 20 minutes, chew the food, the feeling
of fullness will come to you earlier and you will
be more satisfied because you will recognize the flavors
of
the smoothie
,
congratulations
.
is sipping almond milk and nibbling on
a banana, isn't it? Yes, it's a completely different
feeling, and I think that people forget
how delicious and a very healthy
fruit a banana is, and they don't even recognize the taste of a banana, because
they actually
use it either as a smoothie or
in the form of some kind of powder
that is already
dehydrated
or granola in
which it is ground
up with everything else
. People laugh at me because
I eat slowly. Yes, but be happy that
you eat slowly. I am the same several
times. I remember the same thing when I was
a child, when my mother
was finishing the dishes. I was still eating, but
maybe it was another thing with me
, but I used to enjoy everything, so that
's the way it is, but let's say today, when we talk about
Michelin restaurants, I had the opportunity
to work with people who have such
restaurants, and then we also did a
very good story as part of the Croatian
Association of Small Family Hotels, and
we made breakfasts for various areas
of Istria Gorski Kotar Slavonja Dalmacija and
so on and then I talked to
the chefs and I talked to the heads of the restaurants,
the chefs are very inclined to
offer people meat in its native form
even in such top restaurants if
they need it more, I think if Mišić is in question
he will offer the meat, Mišić will not
grind it, however, when you come to such
restaurants that have innovative
cuisine, I also love such restaurants,
I love these innovations, but the heads of the restaurants
used to return meals because the guest said
if he doesn't want to eat something that has to be
chewed, let them prepare it for him in such a way that
he can easily eat it Aha So
people themselves have become averse to the fact that
even in a place where they have dedicated a few
hours to eat there, they want
to eat quickly, that's this impatience in
our nature and that as if something will
escape us, nothing will escape us, I think that
when we think rationally, this is just
a question of lack of time and the question of
what the whole society is
focused on productivity, that's right, and we
have all the time in this world, the truth
yes, I think we set that pace for ourselves
, so we ourselves, who will
I imagine now, I have to eat the queen who
ran faster than everyone in Alice in
Wonderland You have to run faster than her, let
her run, you have your own rhythm, in fact those
primary life functions, things that
keep our organism healthy and
functional, we have completely
ignored this, such as sleep, such as
nutrition, such as the body exercises and
we actually do everything in a certain way Everything
has become artificial m Everything has become
staged let's say instead of us Before,
how did our grandparents
work in the field, so they dug something
there
with a hoe, then they physically
did something, or they mowed, or they walked.
They
didn't have to set aside
a special
time
in the day to train,
but
this
our modern modern way of
life has disrupted everything.
st and to the lane and
walked 10
km Well, isn't that absurd? Well,
isn't that absurd? I think that our
pots
got confused, so isn't it a little unbelievable
that maybe we lost our common
sense, honestly? I wouldn't say common
sense, but
simply stop and imagine and
reflect for one day what the
older guys say, don't
do anything for one day, just go outside and walk walk walk
listen to the sounds around you
and I'm trying, I'm really trying because
I see that this is the only way not to
rush too quickly into
any activities, for example, because the most destructive thing
is
that
you
like to help everyone,
like
to
do
everything
and
you are
ambitious. what
is called a healthy life span, but a healthy
life span for more than 10 years, those
who start it after 60, 65, for
more than five to eight
years, now there is a big discussion about
dementia, it's very difficult for me
to talk about it, because my dad died, after
all, not from Alzheimer's, but there was some
dementia
in the background.
Uh, it was always a wonderful relationship, but
it's not nice for anyone, especially those who are
closest to you, to see that your cognitive
functions are declining, and we are talking about a person who
was in his in the mid-80s,
these are already advanced years, but today you
also have people and you have examples where people in
their 90s and late 90s
function very well
, and these are those people who are
simply what one would say much
more fjak relaxed, but not
fjak in the sense that now I'm going to lie down and
do nothing, but fjak in the
sense that they are
resistant to external influences that
you have to do something that deadline this deadline that deadline deadlines
kill us and that's for sure for you
deadlines and clocks and
alarms are constantly on, isn't it, if
we could manage to somehow
reduce term one, which now
appears the same way, I don't know how to
translate it into Croatian, it turned out that
certain centers of the brain
turn on completely differently, these are
visual representations, artificial intelligence,
if it helped, they turn on completely
different human perception
of the activity of brain cells and the activity
of certain centers means the hypothalamus and
the amygdala, that's what is said The third eye is
the hypothalamus, then the
pituitary gland. glands All these
things everything goes slow Aha if you actually
take support
from the outside and look I don't know into nature you listen to
the birds for 10 minutes or you do the same thing
through some kind of smartphone
those stimuli
are absent because we are obviously not created to
be able
to perceive some things two-dimensionally
And you said this very well a dream and a dream is
nothing but following that and the rhythm
of the change of light and darkness we must actually
realize that we need to sleep during the dark part of the day because then
the hormones that are not secreted
they suggest to us an activity
such as
serotonin, but Melatonin is secreted to
put us to sleep so that
we fall asleep why should we fall asleep that
everything that is toxic can be excreted through the
lymphatic and glia system of the brain and that
these toxins are eliminated as much as possible
during the act when you are not active our
brain is active in processing these
poisons and
eliminating them if this does not happen
then if sleep is shortened then these
poisons accumulate and then all of a sudden
we have various psychogenic symptoms that
lead to behavioral disorders
and disorders of our consciousness anxiety,
depression, and what is that, you just need
to get rid of those toxins because then other
molecules
innervate some parts of us
that shouldn't, because you usually
said that people used to chew
their food because the food wasn't mixed and
so on, also people didn't go to
bed that late and didn't eat
after 10 or 11 o'clock in the evening, and I know that
many people today tell me how to
change my habit when I come
home and shift around 10 o'clock, then my main
meal is around 11 o'clock that's why I also have
a light in the fridge so I can eat M
I think that if it were here I would say it
's already a myth because there are really ways to
prepare a meal yourself and
take it to work and eat that meal
somewhere around 4 p.m. when you should and then
when you get home you drink some fermented
drink or whatever you want Relax or
whatever and go
to sleep before it got dark
I asked you if you knew anything about
histamine intolerance I gave the enzyme and
Uh, I told you that
something started to happen to me now, is it
stress or whatever, like that uh
, deep inflammation,
inflammation of the deep layer of the skin, like
some hematomas, or something accompanied by
urticaria, it seems like a rash appeared on
some, yes, but Josip was actually quite
rare, and now I took blood and followed
those findings, and so on, and I see that he
gave me an enzyme at some eight, I think
it should be above 10, like sure
, is it normal? Mhm
Uh, I didn't really know what
histamine was before that, people always
associated it with histamine, and histamine is
biogeniamine, which is very characteristic
of allergic conditions, it is released by
our leukocytes. One type of leukocyte as
a reaction to a reaction when you have an
allergen that you cannot tolerate, then
antibodies are activated against that
allergen and people who are allergic, I don't
know. Yesterday, my colleague told me
strangely that she is allergic to chamomile and
celery. Chamomile is not allowed to consume
chamomile or celery. because
she gets an allergy in the sense that
an allergic reaction will manifest itself, you never know how
it will manifest itself, with her
it manifested itself in swelling and even in the trachea,
I think what is very dangerous is that with
me, but with you it can
manifest itself again as swelling of certain
parts under the skin of the subcutaneous fatty
tissue or your trachea as well as
swelling of, say, blood-filled
parts
Mhm
histamine is
a normal product Which our body
synthesizes and creates so easily because
you may have heard or you may have heard there is
a basic amino acid called
histidine histidine So one of the 20
amino acids is that basic basic not
because it reacts alkaline
it reacts alkaline m
it has, let's say alkaline that
m ionization constant but it doesn't matter
it reacts in that area that is not
acidic that is its characteristic that it is basic
we have several basic amino acids
they are rare but this histamine is one of
them histidine is one of them histidine
is only obtained in
one step it means
in one step it loses CO2 in the second
step one group Oh and
histamine is formed means two steps are enough to
form this biogenic amine and it is useful
in
our
body because it, if
you are infected with some kind of
parasites
or
you get worms or
I don't know
what
he tests the cells
will destroy it and destroy
you. histamine intolerance,
the increase in allergies and
histamine intolerance, this was something we
encountered for the first time not
so long ago, maybe 18 years ago, it's
not that long ago, so it was the first time I heard
that we
can have capsules that contain
diamine oxidase
, diamine oxidase is an enzyme that is normally
isolated from the tissues of some animals, which
means from the entrails or everything, but it's
pure protein, it's not that expensive, that
preparation means you can have 10 tablets
somewhere, I think maybe 1
EUR 10 EUR each pill , that
package and then people are recommended,
ahem, regardless of whether I have been diagnosed with this
intolerance or not
at the moment when they don't know what
Iran will have on their table, and now I will immediately explain
when it is and they don't know what it will be
for me that it is good to take some or digestive
enzymes, what I said, which are normally
secreted by the pancreas or pancreas, or that it is
good to take an enzyme that will break down your
excess histamine, but not from your
cells, but from the food you will
consume Aha aha
food that is rich
in histamine is very healthy and very good
food, you heard for the taste in mom or Zen
taste means that we have sour we have
sweet
we have salty we have bitter four tastes
the fifth taste is in mom means the taste
you get When you eat all of that in one It
would be, for example, ground walnuts is that
taste or say soy sauce or when
you eat miso paste It is that nice taste you have
everything in you or very good homemade prosciutto
very good homemade cheese the real one
that
Art just the smelly one as they say
the finest
the finest matured cheese and when
you eat tomato salsa or juice of
tomatoes, but the best cooked ones, and
all that food is rich in histamine, so then
you eat a pizza and you also have
mozzarella on it, and someone puts a nice
Parmesan cheese on it, and then someone puts a nice
prosciutto or a nice kulen, you got very
large amounts of histamine
in that food or in fermented
products, because fermentation produces
histamine from histidine, or even in fish, see
it was seen that I think
we have such basic amino acids in fish, even though the fish
is at the temperature of the fish market and not on
ice, that is somewhere between 15 and 17
degrees, that process of converting histidine into histamine is still going on
in that
fish, even a small blue one, and then people
eat healthy fish full of omega-3
amino acids and high-quality, say,
proteins such as anchovies,
anchovies, and suddenly they get a big rash
or big,
say, swollen eyelids, but why does
the body become
this sensitive to histamine food
because diamine oxidase is an enzyme that
we also have in the digestive tract and it is
present in our intestines and especially in
the part of the small intestine where absorption takes place
and it neutralizes histamine from
food. Ah, but
now
we have started eating
huge amounts of refined food in one meal.
In addition to that, we also drink red wine,
which
is full of
histamine . in which
situations we are often invited to
some kind of banquets or to some kind of events
or you have to go on a trip and then you are
lucky to go on some kind of better
airline or on a plane to get some
nicer things if you are in another
category and not in Economy class and
it can happen to you on those longer flights
that you really have real
histamine intoxication from food because
you get all such things one after the other
and your body doesn't have that much capacity
to break down that excess histamine,
it will happen to you once the second time you'll
just maybe eat a pizza and drink
water with it and it won't appear. And the third time
someone
can eat the smallest amount of
some kind of fine matured
cheese. I had the same thing. I ate
soup
made from 20-
year
-old pecorino cheese. It
was like a cream soup with
that
. and then really when I
thought, well, it's histamine, it's
a top-quality fermented product, that's what
stood out, there's no more histidine,
not even a little, it's a lot of histamine, but if you could
say it more precisely, but if the amount of histamine in the body
were to decrease, then
I assume that reactions should no longer
occur, do you? I think that
the only way is to eat smaller
meals gradually and to become aware that
we have histamine in very fine fermented food and drink,
and if the call for
such some kind of diet or at home
you do something, then you take diamine oxidase
in a capsule, I'm not advertising to anyone now
, I won't say anything, but like some
patients who
have an enzyme deficiency, sometimes
it's good to take
diamine oxidase 20 minutes before eating,
you put it in your body, it will be
excreted, it's not resorbed, it doesn't enter the blood,
but it will help in the intestines to break down excess
histamines
, but that's only for
people who have an intolerance
to histamine
. that some
people who will never have the opportunity in
their life to eat such fine food and all
at once or eat, for example,
food that has a lot of fermented soy such
as ,
for
example,
if
you go
to a
Japanese
or
Chinese or Thai
restaurant .
in front of you And you try everything and
then all of a sudden it's too much for the body at that
moment of time.
Do you think that this
low-grade chronic inflammation is
in some way responsible for everything that happens
to people
with
food allergies, or
is
it for sure because
the balance of the
intestinal microbiota
is
very
important and it means depending
on it
? of waste
materials in the intestines, so the mucus is 4 to 6 mm and
then
the
cells
or we won't have enough
mucus
, that layer of mucus of 4 to 6 mm will be lost
and
we then directly have
contents
and
intestines that are intended for
excretion
. they are full of
enzymes, they are full of waste materials from
bacteria, and they are also full of some
things that cause additional inflammatory
reactions because they stimulate immune
cells, such as lipopolysaccharide, that is
the envelope of certain bacteria, and if
it is released into the circulation, it happens in no
time, and then the body deals with it more than
it actually deals with its
primordial role, breaking down substances
into those components that can be absorbed and
that will help us to feel even
better because we have eaten some
food, the body will have to rehabilitate it, just like
when the body rehabilitates a fire immediately
what is acute, but if such a thing
lasts for a long time, we are no longer talking about acute,
but about chronic constant triggering and
constant inflammation, then there is a great
imbalance. Is every allergy this one
related to histamine? I see that
people who are allergic take
antihistamines, yes, that is true, but in
terms of Now I just want to say something,
when I speak to students otherwise, from
a biochemical point of view, every allergy
should actually be mediated
by immunoglobulins. And it is these
immunoglobulins that actually cause
such an allergy.
what is intolerance mm intolerance
is not an allergy intolerance is
the intolerance of some part of the food,
let's say it doesn't have to happen to you that you
won't be able to break down the histamine that is in
your smoothie because there will definitely be some
histamine because there is little of it, you will
drink it
your body's diamine oxidase that is
secreted from the kidneys The decomposition will come to the intestines
and it will break it down and that's it, and at that
moment you won't have any symptoms
of intolerance because you are not allergic to
histamine, you are intolerant, you don't have
enough enzymes to break it
down, allergies are other things,
allergies are things where you really
need to differentiate food intolerance,
there is a big difference, because if
you go to take blood and see that you have a lower
content of diamine oxide,
is that right Mhm, then you will know that
the lack of that enzyme is in quantity, or
maybe its function is not
good enough or it is modified in some
way, it is not able to break down histamine
from the food you consume, and with
allergies, for example, there are allergy sufferers and
children who are very often
allergic today, and it turned out that this
is very much related to the
gut microbiome and that the composition of the microbiota in
the intestines is significantly different compared to
people who do not have allergies, but I would not
put
a stamp on it or swear it
in stone, but it has been said many times that
those children who were born
through the way that it was normal from
vaginal birth adopted the
mother's microbiota that inhabited her
urogenital tract during the last two or three
months of pregnancy and that they In fact, if they
were fed with the mother's medicine after that,
they were much less prone to the creation and
development of allergic conditions Hmmm, I
guess that's it for some of us, this
is no longer applicable for some of us, if it already
ended well, but in any case,
we can distinguish
whether we are allergic or
intolerant, and on the other hand,
we can improve
the composition of our microbiota with other
dietary interventions or supplements so our
allergies will be reduced, that can also
happen. I can't claim now, but it turned out
that
by using
whole foods, what would it do? It's
a platitude to tell people, but it means
using a mostly plant-based
diet, although you don't need to be strict in
any diet, but use it now.
Scientists from the United Kingdom
have really stated that you should use
three 30 different
vegetables or fruits, including spices
and those herbs, aromatic herbs, all of which
are included in the 30 every week in your diet and that
this is drastically maintained at, let's say, your
movement. and the inertia of the inertness of your
organism on the health of your cognitive
abilities to reduce any
inflammation that could arise,
to recover the intestine, to establish
a normal bowel movement, which is all
true if you tried
to make a list of what you would
eat during the day, already in your smoothie you have five or six
foods that you ate that day, and now
imagine a week, you have seven days, so
you can have 30 of them without any problems in
a week just through breakfast, and then
let's say now it will be salad time, so
the salad is never just one leaf
inside will come the time of radishes,
the time of peas and legumes will come, we can
use all of that and these are all first-class
things that if we feel how
it actually tastes in the mouth
when we chew, we can also help everything from
the head,
the jaw,
the appearance, for example,
the neck, the posture, everything can be arranged differently
if we are a little aware that we have to
know what we eat and what you
said before and how we breathe and that we sleep at least
six to seven to eight hours a
day, I think it is possible today. If
you sleep three hours, four hours certainly not
it should be safe enough, it's
quite difficult, but a while ago you reminded me
of a period in my life when I
entered
menopause, the first symptom for me was that
I
had the inability to sleep.
It's true that I had a change
in time zones while
traveling, but one
of my first symptoms was that I
didn't have a normal sleep rhythm,
probably partly caused by
lifestyle
and constant brain
activity
. Yes,
I know that something, yes, and then
let's say that it's really very
deteriorating because if you don't sleep
for a couple of days,
you're already on the fourth day, practically
for some help you have to find a way to
help yourself reset, don't take
sleeping
pills, but really,
let's stop using computers
,
stop
everything
. I would call it burnout, I
think that it is a load on the nervous
system, a load, a load on
the physiological and, let's say, physiological and
mental health, to the detriment of the fact that
what we said before, you feel that
you know everything in your head, everything is crystal
clear, you have everything arranged and you know how
it should be done, but your body
doesn't listen to you anymore,
you've had enough of computers and
presentations, and everything you'd like best to have,
maybe it will be that you have the Matrix in front of you
and that you only
coordinate what will be done
with your thoughts
so that you don't have to be present on
that side
of the world to tell someone and so on
.
change a lot of things and sleep and
hotels and everything, we won't complain
here because someone would say
you were privileged, but everything has its
positive and negative sides and it
consumes
the body a lot, I have no
doubt that it happened to me because of my lifestyle,
my going into menopause because he is
in
the same line as And what I didn't
know, but only later did I find out that it was
the same in my family for
the generations before me, that was the time
when they were entering menopause,
but maybe I also became aware
at that time if that could happen to me,
I would have maybe pulled
the handbrake a little earlier and not hit
my head against the wall and only then have to
reset. That's why I'm very glad that through
this society for menopausal medicine, which
is led by my colleague Professor Marina Šprem
Golšin, it's really talked about and
congresses are held regularly, and
in this
multidisciplinary environment
we talk about women's health without
the big stigmas that would normally be
said, but that's not important only for women.
It's important for men too. I'm sure that
these transitions exist in
many times connected with their task,
whether suddenly a man
becomes, for example, a father, that is already one
responsibility, if then a man gets
a new opportunity to change his workplace,
conditions change, everything can go for
the
better, better, better, and all that, then
that is all in a way a pressure on
the body,
not
only physically,
but
also mentally , for
example, health and feelings. it's a burden,
it's a burden, but it should be a pleasure for you, and
what I envy some of the great people
I've had the opportunity to meet in life,
who are really the best in any
field, it doesn't matter, but it's top notch in
terms of training, how to live, that
they are in their 90s,
I don't know, still like no, don't get me wrong,
that they have that feeling for some playfulness,
curiosity, and that everything in their life
has always been like
a game for children, so are they, and I think that's
the ultimate thing that I would also
like to reach
at some stage as soon as possible as soon as I get out
now but now I feel good this is just
like a game we are not exhibitionists but we like
to play let's say we like to try some new
things and we like to be in the company of people
who are pleasant it was my first time at
this one meeting on this
podcast I was very pleasant why not
repeat something that you are comfortable with and
share some things that if someone
can catch all these planes that I
mention and that are flying in my head what
should I do if Uh you met such people
who look at life as
a game and one's obligations, work tasks,
goals and so on, some of them are
unfortunately deceased, but that's it, they
were really great minds, I think
both men and women, and let's say
they expressed themselves excellently in science and
in let's say art,
whether it was music or painting
whether it's about filmmaking,
they've really always been that, you can see that
the eyes are very interested, that they
cover everything, they don't worry too much about some
things, the question now is how are the people
who lived and live with them, how do they
perceive them, do they perceive them
as empathetic enough and for their family,
they often don't perceive them, but
think that they are more self-centered,
but the fact is that we also have to
make ourselves aware that we have to first of all,
in some way, I wouldn't say, but
satisfy yourself and love yourself so that you can
love that
copy to those you care about
I am you as I mentioned to you that I
was on a meditation retreat this weekend
Mhm
Uh and man can I say hello to him this
way his name is Mislav Brečić he
is a theater director but he
studies Buddhism his whole life Mhm and this one he
was
a student of vipassena meditation for years and
decades and now he has been teaching it for about 15
years a very impressive person and like
his appearance when you see him he
looks imposing like Gandalf the 2nd he is tall yes yes
my hair sits Uh very calm Uh
intellectual wonderful speaker And this one
and I was there from last Thursday to
Sunday
Good And I'm just now especially how I
threw myself into the head yes yes crazy to
develop it to be successful so that I can
live financially from it and so on
this one I realized how fast my pace is
Mhm
and as I spent those three days there
let's say I realized what
a load
my physical part of being and mental emotional
emotional part of being is under Uh especially through
that great contrast where literally
I am all day long or was in walking
meditation or in sitting meditation without
any device that Uh We talked
minimally and then now when I came back
I got, for example, one
of the things that stayed in
my head right away during each
meditation was that we have to make a vow
of non-punishment and nurturing that
you don't punish yourself because you didn't
achieve some kind of goal because you didn't
do this well whatever and a vow of
nurturing that you nurture yourself as
you would nurture your child or your
best friend or whatever A very
often we miss it actually and now that
I
have come back to this modern m M life
in the city in the centrifuge I have noticed
that even one to two meditations a day for
30 minutes can't completely calm
me personally considering all
the activities I have Mhm and it's
amazing What we are in now not
everyone lives as likely as me or
as you live or you tell me Yes
The pace can be fast but what are
the consequences on the body probably that's
why I try the more you reduce
those deadlines, that's what's very, very
difficult, it's very difficult to bear because
you're forced to actually do more things
at the same time, and at the same time
, you have the same need as every other
person to go for a walk, to go outside and to
reset yourself, that's why you really need
to reduce the scope of work as much as possible.
I admire you, how
you managed to do such two jobs, which
are not easy at all, not even the first
managerial job, and here you are everything here,
you're everything here, you're not just a manager,
you have to ensure fine financing, and
scriptwriters and producers, all in It's not easy for someone
, it looks simple from
a father of two children and a husband and all these
things. Nothing is easy, so
I know how you can feel, but
the most productive period is between the ages of 40
and 50, that's definitely the
period for which I said when
I turned 40, now I will do everything
what are you asking me for the next 10 years and I will
try to do everything and then I will
think a little about myself and it should have been said
now I will think about myself and we will do everything
as much as we can to be
excellent but nothing has to be perfect
so that it will be very good and it will be good again
maybe maybe it is a question of Uh role models that
are imposed on us is yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes it is true but the same is
the case when we were growing up
we of course had certain standards
in the upbringing of our parents who are you
you simply wanted to be perceived by
your parents and your immediate family
as someone who is not a campaigner who is someone
who is responsible who cares M
That way you also set an example later to your
children This is all true but here is the truth
that it is not necessary to bang on the wall but
it is necessary to stop
early the first word that the mind
said to us at that meditation retreat is
you don't have to do anything this is the whole
time
of
this St.
this is
a valid question
, but you have
to, maybe we don't have to go to
that extreme, and with that thinking,
it's just important that through that setting that you don't
have to do anything, you
actually
understand that you can, that
you
can slow down a bit. I don't like to ever
tell
people,
don't do this.
Don't do that.
I don't even like to give some advice
. and air some people can
supposedly but while we are having fun it is
one way let's try to take that process
as time for ourselves and time to be
with those who are dear to us because at the end
of the day they say the table and the bed bring people together
so let's use those things means
sleep it forgets brain activity
you have
to quiet down if you can and also
feeding take your time if you enjoy
our content support us and become a member of
the YouTube channel members can watch live
stream episodes without ads and access
additional content that is not available in
public episodes click the join button
below the video or follow the link in the
video description, that is, in the first comment, and now
we're going back to episode M actually,
uh, feeding can be one of
the mindfulness practices, so it means
, as we did there, walking and
sitting meditation, as well as
that process
of feeding, yes, you certainly didn't eat
shakes, how did you say, awareness,
conscious, conscious eating, everything, conscious eating, yes,
I don't eat shakes very consciously,
I laugh, I laugh when you teach your
grandchildren more because now they are in there
were children before , but it was always the little teeth
. How do the teeth chew? It's wonderful to see
them when they chew it and then it's yum
yum yum delicious for them, but when they chew they get
yum yum yum delicious and when they swallow they don't
get it of course
the sensory endings are actually on the tongue
and the oral cavity if you process food
there, could you finally give us
an overview of your protocol as
uh related to food and the source of the food itself, the way the
food is prepared, the way it is consumed
and so on. it looks like, say, on
your example, so how did you
organize yourself around everything? It's possible,
for example, just to look at things that
today are more or less constantly emphasized and
constantly stand out as something that represents
the
healthiest way of eating, and that's what everyone
is
saying in turn, even for these days
.
Mediterranean, I would say eat as
we eat anywhere in Croatia,
the food is really high quality and good food
from the projects we had where we
actually did food forensic analysis
of food, we have never seen somehow that we
have
something alarming in our food that
is available to us that it is not good if it is
native food means If we take fruits
and vegetables If we take the basic ingredients grain
breads and so on I would not even say
that everyone must eat right now M that
flour black dark flour and so nobody
tolerates it some people really have
problems with stomach, if they eat that kind of
bread, it's better for them if they eat bread
that is made of white flour or refined
rice compared to unrefined rice,
I wouldn't say that, but how would I
conceptualize it all together in the only way
I think we
've always known, and that's our
Adriatic diet, and that's being shown today,
not
only at our local level
, but
also
at the world level.
I was very interested in what will be
said, which food is
oleocanthal-rich
extra-virgin olive oil, it is
olive oil that has that bitter,
spicy M aroma in it, which means that it is bitter on
the tongue when we swallow it, that
molecule is called
oleocanthal, and it is very similar in its
action to the drug called
brufen, we do not advertise it to anyone, I know that it
inhibits those enzymes of
cyclooxygenase inflammation, it means
by consuming extra-virgin
olive oil, however much it is
now expensive, but today we know that
the daily dose can be satisfied with just one
tablespoon of such
oil, and once a day during the first
part of the day and the second time a day means
two soup spoons of olive oil, you already
get a sufficient dose
of
oleocanthal in the long term, not in the short term,
on the other hand, what I said is that as
many
fruits and vegetables as possible, so that it doesn't
have to be expensive.
there are kumquats, we still have mandarins,
we still have oranges, we
should really eat them in between
meals, we don't need to eat them all day, but
take those ten hours a day when
we actually eat something, we should really
have a main meal in the form of a stew
or something on a spoon where you can have a
lot of food, which are all very
tasty, you can always put a piece
of meat of any kind if you want
, or on Fridays you can have fish soup, but it
also includes carrots and potatoes and peas and
everything you need. I try
to have a meal like that once a day. And
then, for example, in the morning and in the evening, I always have
something that guarantees that I will be able
to withstand all the efforts that day. I usually
eat some fruit in the morning
. But even if I don't have time
, I know how to drink Turkish coffee. I love that
Turkish coffee and coffee also has a
lot of good substances in it, but you don't need
to consume it too much, but two or three coffees
a day are preferable.
I always take a banana and try
to eat it whole and not put it in
a smoothie. as
a kind of snack I say then lunch
some kind of
M stews or maneštrice as we called them,
in which you must
chop some Swiss chard at the end because Swiss chard is available
all year round, now
the other
vegetables will also start quickly and then I kind of make kefir myself,
but anyone can buy either whey
or kefir anywhere today,
such products are very good with us and then eat them because
fermented products you don't have
the problem of having intolerance or
intolerance to lactose into milk
sugar It is already broken down in them and
somehow I try to have that
part where I don't take in food for at least eight to 9
hours a day somehow stop eating at 9:
in the evening and until 6 6 and a half in the morning don't
eat anything because it is quite necessary occasionally it
is also very important maybe reduce
the food intake by half take less in one
day to simply allow the body
to reset it doesn't matter that really
no one will today the absurdity is that we are
in a world where a billion people are starving
we constantly we talk about how
we shouldn't eat, but none of us will be
harmed if
he only drinks tea and water all day and he will only
feel better, he will be more awake and if he walks,
if he goes to nature, even on the road,
but walking should be done, I think
it is quite important and I try
to use the technologies available to us
as much as I can.
So count steps in the same way, but
now I already know by heart how much I need
to walk, where I need to walk in order to
achieve something, and I am still far from
someone, let's say I am good in that sense
I feel good, but I'm still far
from what you could call
holistic overall health.
I'll probably need a few more years if I survive
until then, you still have time
yes where is 120 years old you're only halfway yes
yes yes
yes thank you for visiting thank you Vinko for
the invitation nothing team see you in a
week hi